---
slug: 2019/12/ui-core-4
title: UI-core 4 release
# author: [joe]
author_title: DHIS2 Core Team
tags: [libraries, ui-core]
---

As you might know, UI Core version 4 has recently been released. We
recommend you check out our
[changelog](https://github.com/dhis2/ui-core/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md)
for the full list of changes. There are also live demos and API docs at
[https://ui-core.dhis2.nu](https://ui-core.dhis2.nu).

:::warning deprecated
Note, ui-core is deprecated. Please use the [UI Library](https://ui.dhis2.nu) instead.
:::


<!--truncate-->

To help you upgrade to ui-core 4 we’ll briefly go through the most
important changes that require your attention:

-   Form controls look and feel
-   Form controls and Field components
-   Callback style
-   Select component removal
-   SingleSelect and MultiSelect components introduced
-   TextArea and TextAreaField introduced
-   React version requirement changed
-   Removal of nested component (`Component.Component`) pattern
-   And more...

# Why have the input fields changed?

There are three main reasons for the breaking change in the input fields:

1. The previous inputs were not recognizable enough as inputs for all
   users

2. There were no good reasons to maintain multiple input styles

3. The filled and outlined inputs sometimes interchanged the use of
   labels and/or placeholder text. This needed to be simplified to
   define clearly the roles of the label and placeholder.

The previous filled and outlined inputs were inherited from our use of
Material UI. When building our own UI library we have been able to
create an input component that is right for DHIS2 applications. The new
input component is:

-   Recognizable: it looks and behaves like input fields most users are
    familiar with

-   Understandable: there are no animations or moving parts to distract
    from its core use

-   Using obvious label and placeholder texts: a label is always above, a
    placeholder text is always within. Using one does not affect the
    other.

If you haven't already, make sure to remove the `filled` prop from your
ui-core `Input`s and `InputField`s, as it no longer does anything.

# \*Field components

You'll notice we've mentioned the `Input` and `InputField` above. All of
our form components now have a `<componentname>Field` equivalent. The
`Field` variants add props for commonly used patterns like a `label`,
`validationText`, `helpText` and more. See our [API
docs](https://ui-core.dhis2.nu/#/api) for the complete list.

# New callback style

The callback style for ui-core components has changed. Previously any
callbacks passed to our components would be called with the synthetic
event. We’re now calling all callbacks with an object with relevant data
first, and the synthetic event second. To clarify, this is for example
how the `onChange` prop on our `Input` component now works:

```jsx
<Input
    name="inputname"
    onChange={({ data, event }) => {
        const { value, name } = data

        // the same as event.target.value
        console.log(value)
        // will log "inputname", see the "name" prop above
        console.log(name)
    }}
    // other props omitted for clarity
/>
```

We’ve done this because ui-core 4 introduced non-native components, and
this allows us to pass any custom data besides the event. To keep things
consistent, we’ve adopted this pattern for all our components. See our
[changelog](https://github.com/dhis2/ui-core/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#breaking-changes)
for the exact properties passed in the first argument.

# Select deprecation

Speaking of non-native components, the `Select` component has been
deprecated In favor of the new `SingleSelect` and `MultiSelect`
components. They’re not backed by the native select element, and thus
allow us to create a select component that is more in line with modern
UI and UX expectations. As a small example, this is how the new
`SingleSelect` and `MultiSelect` can be used:

```jsx
import React from 'react'
import {
    SingleSelect,
    SingleSelectOption,
    MultiSelect,
    MultiSelectOption,
} from '@dhis2/ui-core'

const singleSelected = { value: '1', label: 'one' }
const multipleSelected = [
    { value: '1', label: 'one' },
    { value: '2', label: 'two' },
]

const Example = () => (
    <div>
        <SingleSelect
            selected={singleSelected}
            onChange={({ selected }) => {
                alert(
                    `Selected changed to: ${JSON.stringify(selected, null, 2)}`
                )
            }}
        >
            <SingleSelectOption value="1" label="one" />
            <SingleSelectOption value="2" label="two" />
            <SingleSelectOption value="3" label="three" />
        </SingleSelect>
        <MultiSelect
            selected={multipleSelected}
            onChange={({ selected }) => {
                alert(
                    `Selected changed to: ${JSON.stringify(selected, null, 2)}`
                )
            }}
        >
            <MultiSelectOption value="1" label="one" />
            <MultiSelectOption value="2" label="two" />
            <MultiSelectOption value="3" label="three" />
        </MultiSelect>
    </div>
)
```

# New components

We’ve added several other new components, most notably:

-   `Textarea` and `TextareaField`
-   `FileInput` and `FileInputField`.

# React version

There has been a slight bump in the required react version, ui-core now
requires at least react 16.8 and react-dom 16.8.

# Smaller changes

-   The `Modal` now always renders (instead of accepting an `open` prop).
    Make sure to not render it if you don't want it to be displayed.

-   Besides the user-facing changes listed above, we've added a lot of
    integration tests for our components and are in the process of adding
    more.

-   The TabBar no longer has to be nested in a ScrollBar, instead the
    TabBar now has a `scrollable` prop.

-   `Modal.Actions`, `Modal.Content` and `Modal.Title` have been removed.
    Instead you can use `ModalActions`, `ModalContent` and `ModalTitle`.

-   `className` props are allowed on all our components, but note that we
    do not guarantee that styling component internals won't break, so use
    with care.

-   Our theme now also exposes spacers, elevations and layer constants.

We hope the above is useful in your upgrade to version 4 of ui-core. Let
us know if you encounter anything, and feel free to open an issue or PR!
